Title: MonoPhysics: Estimating Geometry, Appearance, and Physical Parameters from Monocular Videos

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30320v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:54:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# MonoPhysics: Estimating Geometry, Appearance, and Physical Parameters from Monocular Videos 

Daniel Rho 1 Jun Myeong Choi 1 Matthew Thornton 1 Biswadip Dey 2 Roni Sengupta 11University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 2Meta 

Figure 1: Overview of MonoPhysics . A trainable 3D representation and physical parameters are simulated and rendered, and supervised by image-based losses L against a monocular video. Solid blue arrows mark optimization paths shared with existing multi-view methods, while red dashed arrows mark additional paths proposed in this work. MonoPhysics introduces three contributions, numbered in the figure: scene re-parameterization, physics-aware geometric refinement, and differen-tiable position map. 

# Abstract 

Existing inverse physics methods recover physical parameters from multi-view videos, where geometric constraints across views resolve scale and 3D structure. In monocular settings, however, such constraints are absent, leading to severe scale ambiguity, inaccurate geometry, and weak coupling between appearance optimization and physical simulation. We propose MonoPhysics, a framework for monocular inverse physics estimation of deformable objects using differentiable MPM simulation and 3D Gaussian Splatting, which jointly optimizes geometry, appearance, and physical parameters from a single camera view. We address these challenges through three visual-physical bridges: global scale alignment, physics-aware geometry refinement, and a differentiable position map, which together enable accurate optimization from monocular observations alone. We evaluate on Vid2Sim and our new dataset of elastic and plastic objects, showing that MonoPhysics outperforms existing baselines in monocular settings and achieves performance comparable to multi-view baselines using only a single camera. 

# 1 Introduction 

Recovering physical properties of objects from video, such as material stiffness and deformation behavior, is important for robotic manipulation of deformable objects, as well as building digital 

> arXiv:2605.30320v1 [cs.CV] 28 May 2026

twins and virtual environments [ 10 ]. Recent advances in differentiable physics simulation [ 9, 22 ] and neural 3D representations [ 19 , 13 ] have enabled inverse physics : recovering physical parameters by optimizing through differentiable simulations to match observed motion. Existing inverse physics methods [ 16 , 33 , 1, 32 , 2] typically rely on synchronized multi-view captures, where geometric constraints across views resolve 3D structure and absolute scale. However, multi-view rigs are unavailable for the most common sources of dynamic video, including most in-the-wild captures. Enabling physical system identification from monocular video would unlock these abundant data sources for downstream applications without requiring specialized hardware. These multi-view methods [ 16 , 33 , 1, 32 , 2] rely on triangulation to resolve 3D structure and absolute scale prior to physical parameter estimation. The physics optimization therefore operates on geometry that visual evidence has already constrained. The monocular setting is significantly more challenging, as geometry must be inferred without multi-view constraints and is inherently ambiguous in scale. While recent 3D foundation models [ 27 ]can recover plausible geometry from a single image and provide a strong starting point, their outputs remain unreliable in occluded regions and lack absolute scale, both critical for physical simulation. Prior inverse physics methods typically decouple geometry reconstruction and physical parameter estimation, assuming a reliable 3D representation can be obtained from multi-view inputs [ 16 , 33 ,1, 32 ]. In the monocular setting, this decoupling breaks down, often requiring joint optimization of geometry, appearance, and physical parameters. We present MonoPhysics , a framework for monocular inverse physics of general deformable objects based on differentiable MPM simulation and 3D Gaussian Splatting, initialized from a 3D foundation model [ 27 ] and jointly refined under physical and visual supervision. We use 3D Gaussians for both rendering and simulation, where each Gaussian serves as a visual rendering primitive explaining pixel observations and a physical MPM particle with 3D position, volume, velocity, and deformation. The inverse physics pipeline has a visual side and a physical side, coupled by differentiable rendering and simulation. In the monocular setting we identify several connections between them that remain weak or missing, preventing image cues from fully constraining the underlying physical parameters in the absence of multi-view constraints. We propose three bridges that fill in paths missing from the standard pipeline. First, because per-particle position updates produce only local corrections, a single learnable scalar aggregates a coherent global scale signal across all particles, coupling the 3D visual representation to physical-space dynamics so that observed motion can resolve absolute scale. Second, physics-aware geometry refinement computes per-particle volumes from the current particle distribution and incorporates both visual and physical importance during Gaussian relocation, allowing the geometry to adapt to simulation feedback rather than remain frozen at initialization. Third, we propose a differentiable position map that gives Gaussians a direct gradient path from image-space pixel-location losses such as silhouette alignment; standard 3DGS rendering only carries gradients through colors and opacities, so position-based supervision (which is essential when predicted and target shapes do not yet overlap) would otherwise be unavailable. We optimize geometry, appearance, and physical parameters using a combination of rendering loss, optical flow loss, silhouette loss, and particle distribution regularization. We evaluate MonoPhysics on the Vid2Sim benchmark [ 2 ] and compare against existing inverse physics methods [ 2, 1 , 33 , 16 ]. Existing methods degrade in the monocular setting, while our approach consistently outperforms baselines in both future prediction and physical parameter estimation, achieving physical parameter accuracy on Vid2Sim comparable to multi-view setups, using only a single camera. We further test on a new dataset with both elastic and plastic objects under diverse shapes, viewpoints, and motion conditions, where our method demonstrates strong performance. 

# 2 Related Works 

2.1 Inverse Physics from Video 

Estimating physics from video sequences has been studied extensively [ 16 , 20 ]. Differentiable simulation frameworks [ 9, 22 ] enable gradient-based optimization of physical parameters by differen-tiating through the simulation. This allows observed object behavior to directly supervise material properties, initial velocities, and other physical parameters. PAC-NeRF [ 16 ] combined differentiable 2MPM simulation with NeRF to optimize geometry and physical parameters from multi-view video. SpringGaus [ 33 ] integrates a spring-mass model into 3D Gaussian Splatting for reconstruction and simulation of elastic objects. GIC [ 1] applies point-wise losses on particles from a learned 4D repre-sentation to estimate physical parameters. Vid2Sim [ 2] uses feed-forward prediction for initialization followed by lightweight optimization with a mesh-free differentiable simulator [ 21 ]. MASIV [ 32 ]introduces learnable neural constitutive models [ 18 ] that remove the need for hand-crafted constitu-tive laws, enabling material-agnostic system identification. These methods benefit from multi-view constraints or direct 4D guidance, which reduces the problem to estimating physical parameters from an already-resolved geometry. In the monocular setting, these constraints are absent. 

2.2 Monocular and Sparse-View Inverse Physics Estimation 

Monocular video poses unique challenges for inverse physics. Without multi-view constraints, scale is ambiguous and geometry inaccurate, with limited appearance signals for supervision. Prior monocular or limited-view methods partially address these issues. ProJo4D [ 26 ] improves parameter estimation and prediction in sparse-view settings, but still relies on multi-view input. NeuPhysics [ 25 ] learns a 4D representation from monocular video and estimates physical parameters from reconstructed trajectories, but separates representation learning from parameter estimation, assuming accurate 4D reconstruction. PPR [ 31 ] resolves scale for articulated bodies, but relies on priors not applicable to general deformable objects. Gao et al. [ 6 ] estimate physical parameters of thin deformable objects from monocular video, assuming full surface visibility in the first frame. FluidNexus [ 5] reconstructs and predicts fluid dynamics from a single video, but is limited to fluids. 

2.3 Physics-Informed Scene Understanding 

Physical constraints and priors have been used to improve static scene reconstruction or infer structure. Physics-Informed Deformable Gaussian Splatting [ 8] uses physics as regularization for monocular 4D reconstruction and learns time-varying material parameters, but does not perform full inverse estimation with forward prediction. Our framework directly addresses monocular-specific challenges, including ambiguous scale and inaccurate geometry, for general deformable objects using physics-derived signals without object-specific priors or multi-view constraints. PhyRecon [ 23 ]integrates differentiable rendering with particle-based physics simulation to produce physically stable static scene reconstructions. TopoGaussian [ 29 ] infers internal topology from multi-view images. Structure from Collision [ 12 ] estimates interior structure from appearance changes during collision. PhySIC [ 30 ] uses physical contact constraints for human-scene alignment from a single image. Guo et al. [7 ] optimize for physical compatibility to obtain plausible static objects from a single image. BrickGPT [ 24 ] uses physical stability constraints to produce buildable brick structures. However, these methods either operate on static scenes or require multi-view input; our work uses physics as a corrective signal specifically for monocular inverse estimation of dynamic deformable objects. 

# 3 Method 

We first formulate the problem overview (Sec. 3.1). Our three contributions are bridges across the three layers of the inverse-physics pipeline introduced in Sec. 1: a global scale scalar (Sec. 3.2), physics-aware geometry refinement (Sec. 3.3), and a differentiable position map (Sec. 3.4). Loss functions and the full optimization procedure follow in Sec. 3.5. 

3.1 Problem Formulation and Overview 

The input is a monocular RGB video of a deformable object interacting with its environment, e.g., an object falling onto a table. We assume known camera parameters (intrinsics and extrinsics), a known ground plane, and a known constitutive model (e.g., Neo-Hookean elasticity), consistent with prior inverse physics methods [ 16 , 33 , 1 ]. We also require a foreground alpha mask for each frame; when ground-truth masks are unavailable, an off-the-shelf segmentation method can be used. Our goal is to jointly recover the object’s geometry, appearance, and material parameters from these inputs. For 3D representation, we use 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [ 13 ], which integrates with particle-based simulations such as the Material Point Method (MPM). Each Gaussian has position xi, color ci,3opacity oi, and covariance Σi for appearance, and physical volume Vi. The initial physical state is represented by the initial velocity v0.We use an off-the-shelf monocular 3D reconstruction method [ 27 ] to produce an initial set of 3D Gaussians from the first frame, then sample MPM particles from them. We use a differentiable MPM simulator [ 9] to advance them through time under the current physical parameters, producing deformed representations at each frame. At each frame, the color of every pixel C is rendered via 3D Gaussian Splatting using alpha compositing [13]: 

C = cbg 

Y

> i

 1 − αi

 + X

> i

αi ci

Y

> j<i

 1 − αj

, (1) where ci is the color of Gaussian i, αi is the product of the learned opacity and the Gaussian response of particle i at the pixel, and cbg is the background color of that pixel. Losses are backpropagated through the differentiable simulation to update all parameters jointly, as detailed in Sec. 3.5. 

3.2 Scale Estimation through Reparameterization 

Figure 2: Effect of the learnable scale factor s

on the recovered center-of-mass distance across different initial scales. Without s, the optimiza-tion cannot correct errors in the initial scale estimate, whereas with s, our method recovers a near-correct scale regardless of initialization. Monocular 3D reconstruction recovers scene geom-etry only up to an unknown scale factor, as points along the same projection ray are indistinguishable from the camera’s perspective. For physics, how-ever, absolute scale governs world-space positions, velocities, contact timing, volumes, and stress mag-nitudes, so all downstream physical quantities de-pend on it. Scale error therefore propagates into every estimated parameter. Physical dynamics can resolve this ambiguity. However, naively optimizing per-particle positions cannot recover the global scale. Each particle’s gradient mixes local position corrections with the global scale signal, so independent per-particle up-dates produce local adjustments rather than a coher-ent change in the object’s distance from the camera (Fig. 2). Existing inverse-physics methods store particles directly in world space [16, 33, 1, 32]. We instead maintain particles in camera space and introduce a single learnable scalar s that controls the global scale. Scaling in camera space moves particles along their projection rays, leaving 2D projections unchanged but changing all physical quantities. Since physics simulation requires world-space coordinates, we transform using the known camera extrinsics: 

xwi = R (s · xi) + t, (2) where R, t are the camera-to-world rotation and translation, xi is the camera-space position. Because every particle’s physics depends on s, image-space losses backpropagated through the differentiable simulation aggregate a coherent global signal for scale from all particles and all frames. This gives s

a clean optimization path that per-particle degrees of freedom cannot provide (Sec. 4.3 and Fig. 2). 

3.3 Physics-Aware Geometry Refinement 

Accurately estimating geometry from a single camera is difficult: unobserved regions remain in-herently ambiguous even with 3D geometric priors from foundation models. Our key idea is that a differentiable physics simulation (MPM) provides complementary signals to refine geometry, since physical behavior constrains regions that visual observation alone cannot resolve. In neural field-based representations [ 16 , 12 , 11 ], geometry can be refined by optimizing continuous density or occupancy fields. Particle-based representations lack this continuous structure, so geometry is instead captured through per-particle volumes. 

Per-particle physical volume. Existing works that incorporate physics into 3DGS representations [ 1,32 ] assign fixed per-particle volumes, computed once at initialization. In standard MPM initialization, 4these volumes are chosen to satisfy a local partition-of-unity over the simulation grid: the total volume contributed by particles to each grid node matches the cell volume ∆x3. More specifically, the total volume contributed to each grid node equals the cell volume ∆x3:

X

> i

Viwiℓ = ∆ x3, (3) where ∆x denotes cell edge size, and wiℓ is the contribution of particle i to grid node ℓ. During initialization, these per-particle physical volumes are determined. However, keeping volumes fixed throughout optimization prevents the representation from adapting its geometry and total volume. We instead make volumes adaptive by maintaining the partition-of-unity (Eq. (3)), inducing volumes from the current particle distribution at each step. We compute them by iteratively refining per-particle volume to meet the partition of unity for T iterations. algorithm 1 in supplementary shows the algorithm. 

Physics-informed particle management. Adaptive volumes alone cannot add particles where geom-etry is under-resolved, nor remove particles wasted on negligible regions. We therefore complement adaptive volumes with a particle management scheme that relocates particles during optimization. Prior visual-only methods select particles using visual importance only [ 13 , 15 , 14 ]; we propose using physical importance in addition to visual importance. We define a visual importance pvis i

from the rendering footprint, a physical importance pphys i from the physical volume, and the overall importance pi as the average of the two: 

pi ∝ 12 pvis i + 12 pphys i , pvis i ∝ det(Σ i)1/2 · oi, pphys i ∝ Vi, (4) where Σi is the 3D covariance matrix and oi is the learned opacity of particle i. We periodically remove particles with the lowest visual importance pvis i or physical importance pphys i , and replace them by splitting those with the highest overall importance pi, similar to 3DGS-MCMC [ 14 ]. This steers particle redistribution toward regions that are under-resolved either visually or physically. 

3.4 Differentiable Position Map 

Aligning a rendered shape to its target requires gradients that pull misplaced particles toward the correct silhouette. Standard image-space losses provide such gradients only indirectly and only where predicted and observed shapes already overlap: rendering losses act through colors and opacities at overlapping pixels, and optical flow supplies inter-frame motion cues that still rely on a roughly aligned reference shape. Particles that are globally misaligned therefore receive no directional gradient from either loss, a limitation that becomes pronounced under large deformations, where global cues are essential. We bridge this gap by making each pixel position a differentiable function of the Gaussians that affect that pixel’s values, either color or opacity. By writing each position relative to the covering Gaussian’s image-space mean, we introduce the missing gradient path that enables shape supervision. Let x2Di

and Σ2Di denote the 2D image-space mean and covariance of Gaussian i. For pixel p covered by Gaussian i, we define the reparameterized position: 

˜pi = x2Di + ( Σ2Di )1/2z, z = sg 



(Σ2Di )−1/2(p − x2Di )



, (5) where sg( ·) is stop-gradient, treating its argument as a constant during differentiation. We render a position map using the same alpha-compositing formula as in Eq. (1), substituting ˜pi for per-Gaussian color: 

˜p = p Y

> i

 1 − αi

 + X

> i

αi ˜pi

Y

> j<i

 1 − αj

, (6) where ˜p is the output pixel coordinates. Numerically, ˜p always equals the actual pixel coordinate p.This formulation lets pixel-location losses propagate positional gradients to Gaussian parameters. 

3.5 Loss Functions and Optimization 

We introduce the loss terms used across the whole optimization stages. 

Image losses ( Lcolor , Lα). We use standard image losses (L1 + SSIM) for Lcolor , and L1 loss between the rendered opacity map and the ground-truth alpha mask for Lα.5Optical flow loss ( Lflow ). Optical flows can provide which parts should move and in which direction. Several prior works have similarly used optical flow to supervise motion estimation in differentiable rendering and inverse physics pipelines [ 34 , 8, 17 ]. We render predicted flow by splatting per-particle world-space velocities into the image plane using the same Gaussian rasterizer. Optical flow estimation can be noisy and uncertain, especially when physical dynamics change what is visible between frames. We therefore use a probability-based optical flow loss [ 28 ]; the detailed parameterization is given in the supplementary. To capture both global displacement and instantaneous motion, we supervise with two complementary optical flow signals: flow from the first frame to the current frame, and flow from the previous frame to the current frame: 

Lflow = − 1

|Ωt|

X

> j∈Ωt

h

log p



f0→t(pj ) | ˆf0→t(pj )



+ log p



ft-1→t(pj ) | ˆft-1→t(pj )

 i 

, (7) where pj is the position of pixel j, and Ωt is the set of ground-truth foreground pixels at frame t.

ˆfi→j (·) and fi→j (·) denote the rendered and estimated optical flow respectively from frame i to frame 

j at pixel p. The first term anchors global displacement to the reference frame ( t = 0 ), while the second term supervises instantaneous velocity. 

Silhouette loss ( Lsil ). Using the differentiable position map (Sec. 3.4), we obtain rendered pixel positions ˜pk that are differentiable with respect to Gaussian parameters. We then treat each foreground region as a weighted point cloud of these positions and align it to the target using optimal transport, which provides global directional gradients even when the predicted and target silhouettes do not overlap. Let Ωt denote the set of target foreground pixels at frame t, with per-pixel alpha values 

{aj }j∈Ωt , and let ˆΩt denote the set of active rendered foreground pixels, with rendered opacity values {˜ak}k∈ ˆΩt . Since the number of pixels and their alpha values might differ, we use unbalanced debiased Sinkhorn divergence [4] as a loss: 

Lt 

> sil

= SD( {˜pk, ˜ak}k∈ ˆΩt , {pj , a j }j∈Ωt ), (8) where SD( ·, ·) is the debiased Sinkhorn divergence and pj is the GT pixel position. The resulting gradients indicate how each rendered pixel ˜pk should shift spatially and adjust its opacity ˜ak to match the target silhouette. 

Particle distribution regularizer ( Ldistr ). With trainable particle positions, the local distribution directly affects inverse physics estimation. Particles may detach from the body and drift independently, or cluster together and leave voids in their vicinity, both of which degrade the estimation of physical parameters. To mitigate these failure modes, we regularize the spatial distribution via a K-nearest-neighbor penalty: 

Ldistr =

> N

X

> i=1

X 

> j∈N K(i)

max  0, ∥xi − xj ∥ − τmax ∆x + max  0, τ min ∆x − ∥ xi − xj ∥, (9) where NK (i) are the K nearest neighbors of particle i, τmin and τmax are lower and upper bounds in the unit of simulation cell size ∆x. The first term pulls a particle toward its neighbors when they drift too far apart, while the second pushes neighbors apart when they become overly clustered. Both terms vanish in well-distributed regions, avoiding over-regularization of the particle distribution and the underlying geometry. Since each Gaussian can undergo a large deformation during simulation, we apply this regularizer only at the initial configuration (frame 0), before any deformation occurs. 

Optimization strategy. Starting from initial 3D geometry obtained from an image-to-3D model [ 27 ], our optimization proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, we jointly optimize all physics parame-ters (material parameters and initial velocity), Gaussian parameters (positions xi, opacity oi, and covariance Σi), and global scale s (Sec. 3.2) via differentiable MPM simulation, while not optimizing colors ci. Following GIC [ 1 ], we focus on physical dynamics in this stage and refine appearance later. Within each iteration, after backpropagating through the simulation, we take a small number of alpha-map loss steps without re-running the simulation. This keeps the visual representation consistent with the evolving geometry and prevents appearance and geometry from drifting apart. We use all four losses as follows: 

L =

> T

X

> t=0

Ltα + Lt

> sil

 +

> T

X

> t=1

Lt 

> flow

+ Ldistr . (10) In the second stage, we only refine appearance, using both image Lcolor and alpha Lα losses. Details are in the supplementary. 6Table 1: Evaluation on the Vid2Sim dataset. We report rendering quality metrics for future frames prediction and material parameter estimation errors, with all methods evaluated under the same monocular setting. Multi-view results, denoted by ∗, are taken from Vid2Sim [2]. 

Future Frame Rendering Physical Parameter Estimation # of views PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ SSIM ↑ MAE log E ↓ MAE ν ↓

Vid2Sim* 12 25.07 - 0.95 0.51 0.06 PAC-NeRF 1 16.46 0.19 0.88 1.72 0.20 SpringGaus 1 16.36 0.20 0.88 – –GIC 1 19.10 0.17 0.91 0.80 0.05 

Ours 1 21.42 0.11 0.92 0.52 0.06 

Table 2: Evaluation on our synthetic dataset with Elastic and Plasticine materials. We evaluate geometric accuracy (Chamfer Distance (CD) & Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)) and rendering quality (PSNR, LPIPS, SSIM) of future frames, and physical parameter estimation (initial velocity and material parameters) in monocular settings.                                                                                                  

> 3D Trajectory Prediction Future Frame Rendering Physical Parameter Estimation CD ↓EMD ↓PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑MAE v0↓MAE log E↓MAE ν↓MAE log σy↓
> Elastic
> PAC-NeRF [16] 420 0.69 17.06 0.20 0.91 0.14 0.30 0.06 -SpringGaus [33] 965 1.07 16.79 0.26 0.89 0.16 ---GIC [1] 1263 1.16 18.64 0.19 0.93 0.13 0.58 0.09 -
> Ours 220 0.52 18.88 0.18 0.91 0.14 0.33 0.03 -
> Plasticine
> PAC-NeRF [16] 430 0.71 18.67 0.17 0.91 0.12 1.38 0.15 1.06 SpringGaus [33] 555 0.75 17.65 0.21 0.90 0.20 ---GIC [1] 458 0.71 22.08 0.14 0.94 0.18 0.63 0.06 0.45
> Ours 54 0.31 21.22 0.12 0.94 0.21 0.43 0.05 0.19

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Settings Baselines. We compare our results against existing inverse physics methods: PAC-NeRF [ 16 ], SpringGaus [ 33 ], and GIC [ 1]. For comparison, we also included Vid2Sim [ 2] and use it as a baseline. Since Vid2Sim requires multiple views and can not operate with a monocular video input, we only report Vid2Sim’s performance with multiple cameras, excerpted from their paper. 

Datasets. We evaluate on two datasets. We first evaluate on the Vid2Sim [ 2] dataset (elastic objects with fixed camera placement, no initial velocity), using only the first camera to simulate a monocular setting. We introduce a new synthetic dataset built from Google Scanned Objects (GSO, CC-BY 4.0) [ 3], comprising 5 elastic (Neo-Hookean) and 5 plasticine objects with ground-truth point clouds, randomly sampled material parameters, initial velocities, object sizes, and camera distances. Full dataset construction details, including the scene list and constitutive models, are provided in Sec. D. Including two material models demonstrates that our improvements are not specific to elastic objects. 

Metrics. We report two groups of metrics. For future prediction, we use PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS evaluated from the same camera viewpoint (to avoid conflating geometric misalignment with missing texture in novel views), and Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) for geometric accuracy. CD is computed as the bidirectional Chamfer distance between predicted MPM particles and the ground-truth point cloud, averaged over future-prediction frames. For physical parameter estimation, we follow the standard evaluation protocol in this domain [ 16 , 33 , 1]: MAE of initial velocity, log Young’s modulus E, Poisson’s ratio ν, and yield stress σy (for plasticine). 

4.2 Comparison Vid2Sim benchmark. Tab. 1 and Fig. 3 show results on Vid2Sim. Among single-camera baselines, our method achieves the best rendering quality (PSNR) and the lowest material parameter error (MAE 

log E). Notably, our single-camera MAE log E and MAE ν are both on par with multi-view Vid2Sim 7Time Time 

> G.T Ours GIC SpringGaus

Figure 3: Qualitative comparison on Vid2Sim dataset. We compare the rendered image trajectory over time for SpringGaus [33], GIC [1], and our method. 

Time Time 

> G.T Ours GIC SpringGaus

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on our synthetic dataset. We compare the rendered image trajectory over time for SpringGaus [ 33 ], GIC [ 1], and our method. (Left: elastic. Right: plasticine.) 8Table 3: Ablation of image-space loss components. CD indicates future-prediction Chamfer Distance.                                                                          

> LαLdistr Lflow Lsil CD ↓MAE log E↓MAE log σy↓
> ✓–––964.55 ±654.27 0.45 ±0.45 3.32 ±2.33
> ✓✓––454.20 ±537.89 0.60 ±0.27 2.92 ±3.63
> ✓✓✓–438.80 ±483.70 0.36 ±0.30 1.26 ±1.59
> ✓✓–✓151.43 ±206.68 0.55 ±0.33 1.85 ±2.73
> ✓✓✓✓73.57 ±88.78 0.41 ±0.30 0.56 ±0.36

using 12 cameras, indicating that our visual-physical bridges allow physical parameter recovery from a single view at a level comparable to dense multi-view setups. 

Our synthetic benchmark. Tab. 2 and Fig. 4 provide results on our synthetic dataset, which contains both elastic and plasticine objects with diverse material properties, sizes, and initial conditions. Our method achieves the lowest CD for both material types, indicating substantially more accurate geometry recovery. For material parameters, it reduces the MAE for Poisson’s ratio on elastic objects, and reduces the MAE for both Young’s modulus and yield stress on plasticine. Rendering quality is competitive: PSNR is comparable to or higher than baselines on elastic, while on plasticine, GIC achieves slightly higher PSNR but at substantially higher geometric error, suggesting appearance fits the observed view without recovering accurate 3D structure. Initial-velocity MAE is on par with baselines. SpringGaus material parameters are omitted as it uses a spring-mass simulator with parameters not directly comparable to the elastic and plasticine constitutive models. These improvements stem from resolving scale ambiguity and jointly optimizing geometry alongside physical parameters. Fig. 4 visualizes these results qualitatively: objects reconstructed with our method align better with expected deformation patterns and maintain realistic contact with the ground, whereas baselines often produce incorrectly scaled or distorted reconstructions. 

4.3 Ablation Study Loss Functions.             

> Sec. 3.3 Init CD ↓Future CD ↓MAE log E ↓
> -10.79 223 1.10
> ✓4.69 78 0.55

Table 4: Effect of physics-aware geometric re-finement on a representative scene. 

Figure 5: Per-region geometric error before ( top row ) and after ( bottom row ) physics-aware re-finement, projected onto the ground-truth mesh from multiple views. Tab. 3 isolates the contribution of each image-space loss and the distribution regularizer from Sec. 3.5 on the plasticine subset of our synthetic dataset. Adding the distribution regularizer to the baseline substantially reduces CD, confirm-ing that without it, disconnected particles simu-late independently and distort future prediction. The absence of positional guidance from optical flow or silhouette supervision leaves the optimiza-tion without sufficient constraints to recover accu-rate trajectories or material parameters. Optical flow supervision alone has little effect on future-prediction accuracy but significantly improves ma-terial parameter estimation (MAE log E and MAE 

log σy ). This is consistent with its role: flow pro-vides per-particle motion targets that constrain the physical dynamics, but trajectory accuracy in CD also requires correct shape alignment. Silhouette supervision alone produces the opposite pattern (note that Lsil requires the differentiable position map Sec. 3.4): it drives a large geometry improve-ment but contributes less to material estimation compared to flow. This reflects the silhouette loss’s role as a global shape alignment signal rather than a motion supervisor. Combining both losses yields the best option overall, indicating that flow and silhouette supervision are complementary: flow anchors the physical trajectory while silhouette aligns object shape, and accurate geometry in turn benefits material estimation. 9(a) Target frame (b) Rendered image (c) Position gradient map 

Figure 6: Effect of the differentiable position map. The per-Gaussian position gradient −∂Lsil /∂ xi

points left (red), the correct direction toward the target shape (Sec. 3.4). 

Geometry Refinement. 

We first illustrate how physics-aware geometric refinement improves the reconstruction quality of the initial geometry in the first frame. To isolate geometric accuracy from scale ambiguity, both the initial geometry and our refined geometry are first aligned to the true global scene scale, and then compared against the ground-truth point cloud using Chamfer Distance (CD). Tab. 4 illustrates the effect on a representative scene, where refinement reduces both initial CD and downstream future CD and MAE log E. This improvement is consistent across our synthetic dataset: aggregated results show that geometric refinement reduces average initial CD from 11.41 to 7.23, confirming this is a systematic effect rather than a single-scene artifact. Fig. 5 visualizes the per-region geometric error before ( top row ) and after ( bottom row ) refinement, showing reduced error across multiple views. 

Differentiable Position Map. To illustrate how the differentiable position map provides a gradient pathway for direct positional guidance, we visualize the resulting gradients in Fig. 6. The first two panels show the target and current rendered images, while the third renders the positional gradient of each Gaussian, −∂Lsil /∂ xi, as an image. The color of the gradient map indicates that the loss correctly guides the Gaussians toward the target direction (to the left, red). We refer the reader to Sec. C for further details. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We present MonoPhysics , a framework for monocular inverse physics of general deformable objects that jointly recovers geometry, appearance, and material parameters from a single-camera video. Our key insight is that scale, geometry, and material are deeply entangled in the monocular setting and must be solved jointly. To this end, we propose three methods for that: a global camera-space scale, physics-aware particle management, and a differentiable position map. Together, these contributions yield more accurate physical parameter estimation and future prediction than prior monocular baselines. Our method also has limitations that point to promising future directions. First, our refinement reduces but does not eliminate geometric errors. Regions where neither visual nor physical signals are informative remain difficult, and improving overall geometric and physical parameter estimation remains an open direction. Second, our pipeline relies on known camera parameters and known scene geometry (e.g., the ground plane), limiting its applicability to fully in-the-wild videos. Removing this assumption is a natural next step toward truly assumption-free monocular inverse physics. 

# Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This work is supported by a National Institute of Health (NIH) project #R21EB035832 "Next-gen 3D Modeling of Endoscopy Videos". 

# References 

[1] Junhao Cai, Yuji Yang, Weihao Yuan, Yisheng He, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, Hui Cheng, and Qifeng Chen. Gic: Gaussian-informed continuum for physical property identification and simulation. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 75035–75063. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 10 [2] Chuhao Chen, Zhiyang Dou, Chen Wang, Yiming Huang, Anjun Chen, Qiao Feng, Jiatao Gu, and Lingjie Liu. Vid2sim: Generalizable, video-based reconstruction of appearance, geometry and physics for mesh-free simulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 26545–26555, June 2025. [3] Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kinman, Ryan Hickman, Krista Rey-mann, Thomas B. McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google scanned objects: A high-quality dataset of 3d scanned household items. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2553–2560, 2022. [4] Jean Feydy, Thibault Séjourné, François-Xavier Vialard, Shun-ichi Amari, Alain Trouve, and Gabriel Peyré. Interpolating between optimal transport and mmd using sinkhorn divergences. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Masashi Sugiyama, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2681–2690. PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2019. [5] Yue Gao, Hong-Xing Yu, Bo Zhu, and Jiajun Wu. Fluidnexus: 3d fluid reconstruction and prediction from a single video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2025. [6] Zhiyuan Gao, Jiageng Mao, Hong-Xing Yu, Haozhe Lou, Emily Yue ting Jia, Jernej Barbic, Jiajun Wu, and Yue Wang. Seeing the wind from a falling leaf. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [7] Minghao Guo, Bohan Wang, Pingchuan Ma, Tianyuan Zhang, Crystal Elaine Owens, Chuang Gan, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Kaiming He, and Wojciech Matusik. Physically compatible 3d object modeling from a single image. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [8] Haoqin Hong, Ding Fan, Fubin Dou, Zhi-Li Zhou, Haoran Sun, Congcong Zhu, and Jingrun Chen. Physics-informed deformable gaussian splatting: Towards unified constitutive laws for time-evolving material field. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06299 , 2025. [9] Yuanming Hu, Luke Anderson, Tzu-Mao Li, Qi Sun, Nathan Carr, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and Fredo Durand. Difftaichi: Differentiable programming for physical simulation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [10] Hanxiao Jiang, Hao-Yu Hsu, Kaifeng Zhang, Hsin-Ni Yu, Shenlong Wang, and Yunzhu Li. Phystwin: Physics-informed reconstruction and simulation of deformable objects from videos. 

ICCV , 2025. [11] Takuhiro Kaneko. Improving physics-augmented continuum neural radiance field-based geometry-agnostic system identification with lagrangian particle optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5470–5480, June 2024. [12] Takuhiro Kaneko. Structure from collision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16314–16324, June 2025. [13] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42(4), July 2023. [14] Shakiba Kheradmand, Daniel Rebain, Gopal Sharma, Weiwei Sun, Yang-Che Tseng, Hossam Isack, Abhishek Kar, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Kwang Moo Yi. 3d gaussian splatting as markov chain monte carlo. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 80965–80986. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. [15] Joo Chan Lee, Daniel Rho, Xiangyu Sun, Jong Hwan Ko, and Eunbyung Park. Compact 3d gaussian representation for radiance field. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 21719–21728, June 2024. 11 [16] Xuan Li, Yi-Ling Qiao, Peter Yichen Chen, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Ming Lin, Chen-fanfu Jiang, and Chuang Gan. PAC-neRF: Physics augmented continuum neural radiance fields for geometry-agnostic system identification. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [17] Zhuoman Liu, Weicai Ye, Yan Luximon, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang. Unleashing the potential of multi-modal foundation models and video diffusion for 4d dynamic physical scene simulation. 

CVPR , 2025. [18] Pingchuan Ma, Peter Yichen Chen, Bolei Deng, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tao Du, Chuang Gan, and Wojciech Matusik. Learning neural constitutive laws from motion observations for generalizable PDE dynamics. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 23279–23300. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. [19] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM , 65(1):99–106, December 2021. [20] Himangi Mittal, Peiye Zhuang, Hsin-Ying Lee, and Shubham Tulsiani. Uniphy: Learning a unified constitutive model for inverse physics simulation. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16208–16218, 2025. [21] Vismay Modi, Nicholas Sharp, Or Perel, Shinjiro Sueda, and David I. W. Levin. Simplicits: Mesh-free, geometry-agnostic elastic simulation. ACM Trans. Graph. , 43(4), July 2024. [22] J. Krishna Murthy, Miles Macklin, Florian Golemo, Vikram Voleti, Linda Petrini, Martin Weiss, Breandan Considine, Jérôme Parent-Lévesque, Kevin Xie, Kenny Erleben, Liam Paull, Florian Shkurti, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Sanja Fidler. gradsim: Differentiable simulation for system identification and visuomotor control. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. [23] Junfeng Ni, Yixin Chen, Bohan Jing, Nan Jiang, Bin Wang, Bo Dai, Puhao Li, Yixin Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Phyrecon: Physically plausible neural scene reconstruction. 2024. [24] Ava Pun, Kangle Deng, Ruixuan Liu, Deva Ramanan, Changliu Liu, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Generat-ing physically stable and buildable brick structures from text. In ICCV , 2025. [25] Yi-Ling Qiao, Alexander Gao, and Ming C. Lin. Neuphysics: Editable neural geometry and physics from monocular videos. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [26] Daniel Rho, Jun Myeong Choi, Biswadip Dey, and Roni Sengupta. Projo4d: Progressive joint optimization for sparse-view inverse physics estimation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 05 2026. [27] SAM 3D Team, Xingyu Chen, Fu-Jen Chu, Pierre Gleize, Kevin J Liang, Alexander Sax, Hao Tang, Weiyao Wang, Michelle Guo, Thibaut Hardin, Xiang Li, Aohan Lin, Jiawei Liu, Ziqi Ma, Anushka Sagar, Bowen Song, Xiaodong Wang, Jianing Yang, Bowen Zhang, Piotr Dollár, Georgia Gkioxari, Matt Feiszli, and Jitendra Malik. Sam 3d: 3dfy anything in images. 2025. [28] Yihan Wang, Lahav Lipson, and Jia Deng. Sea-raft: Simple, efficient, accurate raft for optical flow. In Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten Sattler, and Gül Varol, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 , pages 36–54, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. [29] Xiaoyu Xiong, Changyu Hu, Chunru Lin, Pingchuan Ma, Chuang Gan, and Tao Du. Topogaus-sian: Inferring internal topology structures from visual clues. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 12 [30] Pradyumna Yalandur Muralidhar, Yuxuan Xue, Xianghui Xie, Margaret Kostyrko, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Physic: Physically plausible 3d human-scene interaction and contact from a single image. 2025. [31] Gengshan Yang, Shuo Yang, John Z. Zhang, Zachary Manchester, and Deva Ramanan. Physi-cally plausible reconstruction from monocular videos. In ICCV , 2023. [32] Yizhou Zhao, Haoyu Chen, Chunjiang Liu, Zhenyang Li, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Yinxiao Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Bhiksha Raj, and Min Xu. Toward material-agnostic system identification from videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 5944–5956, October 2025. [33] Licheng Zhong, Hong-Xing Yu, Jiajun Wu, and Yunzhu Li. Reconstruction and simulation of elastic objects with spring-mass 3d gaussians. In Aleš Leonardis, Elisa Ricci, Stefan Roth, Olga Russakovsky, Torsten Sattler, and Gül Varol, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 ,pages 407–423, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. [34] Ruijie Zhu, Yanzhe Liang, Hanzhi Chang, Jiacheng Deng, Jiahao Lu, Wenfei Yang, Tianzhu Zhang, and Yongdong Zhang. MotionGS: Exploring explicit motion guidance for deformable 3d gaussian splatting. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 13 A Implementation Details 

Optimization. We optimize the physical dynamics parameters over a total of 250 iterations (200 for Neo-Hookean). The number of frames per iteration starts at 4 and increases linearly to the maximum (16 frames for both Vid2Sim and our dataset), reaching this maximum 50 iterations before the end of optimization. The remaining 50 iterations use the full sequence for refinement. At each iteration, we randomly sample frames and additionally optimize appearance-related parameters (excluding position and physical parameters) for 100 inner steps. Since baselines use between 200 and 450 physics simulation iterations, our method does not substantially increase computational cost. After dynamics optimization, we further refine appearance for an additional 5,000 iterations. 

Loss Hyperparameters. As shown in Eq. (10), all loss terms are combined with unit weights, without any relative weighting. For the particle distribution regularizer Ldistr , we use K = 3 nearest neighbors per particle, and set the lower and upper bounds to τmin = 0 .3 and τmax = 0 .8, respectively, which leaves sufficient room for adaptive geometry while preventing overly aggressive regularization. 

Learning Rates. We use the Adam optimizer with fixed learning rates throughout the optimization, and apply the same hyperparameters across all datasets and scenes. The global scale s and the initial velocity v0 both use a learning rate of 0.02 . For material parameters, we use 0.1 for Young’s modulus 

E, 0.01 for Poisson’s ratio ν, and 0.05 for yield stress σy . For Gaussian features, we use 0.0002 for both position and (visual) Gaussian scale, and 0.01 for both color and opacity. 

Computational Resources and Cost. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. Optimization typically takes approximately 2 hours per scene, which dominates the overall cost since our method is optimized per scene. 

# B Physics-Aware Geometry Refinement 

Per-particle physical volume. The detailed algorithm is described in algorithm 1. In our implemen-tation, we run the iteration for 5 steps. Given that 100 to 200 simulation steps are typically required between two consecutive frames in our datasets, this incurs less than 1/10 of the computational cost of a single forward simulation pass for one frame. 

Particle management. Every 10 iterations, we identify the bottom 1% of Gaussians by either visual importance pvis  

> i

or physical importance pphys  

> i

. And replace them by deterministically selecting the same number of Gaussians with the highest overall importance pi, splitting each in half, and relocating the resulting copies to the positions of the removed ones. For relocation, we use the algorithm proposed in 3DGS-MCMC [14]. 

Algorithm 1 Iterative Volume Estimation 

Require: Positions {xi}Ni=1 , grid spacing ∆x, iterations T

Notation: i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }: particle index; ℓ: grid node index 

wiℓ ≥ 0: B-spline weight from particle i to node ℓ; ∆x3: cell volume 

Initialization  

> 1:

nℓ ← P 

> i

wiℓ ▷ weighted particle count at node ℓ 

> 2:

ˆni ← P 

> ℓ

wiℓ nℓ ▷ weighted sum of node occupancies over all nodes influencing particle i 

> 3:

Vi ← min  ∆x3/ˆni, ∆x3 ▷ initial volume: one cell shared among ˆni particles 

Iterative refinement  

> 4:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 5:

˜Vℓ ← P 

> i

wiℓ Vi ▷ total volume attributed to node ℓ 

> 6:

cℓ ← min 



∆x3/ ˜Vℓ, 1



▷ correction: scale down overfull nodes, leave underfull ones  

> 7:

Vi ← min  Vi · P 

> ℓ

wiℓ cℓ, ∆x3 ▷ update Vi by gathering node corrections  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

return {Vi}Ni=1 

14 C Differentiable Position Map 

We expand on the position-map reparameterization introduced in Sec. 3.4, showing why standard 3DGS rendering blocks pixel-coordinate gradients and why the proposed reparameterization restores them. 

Standard 3DGS rendering carries no positional gradient from pixel-coordinate losses. In Eq. (1), the rendered color at pixel p is a function of the per-Gaussian quantities {ci, o i, x2Di , Σ2Di }, while 

p itself is a fixed integer pixel index. For any loss L(p) defined on pixel coordinates (rather than rendered colors), we therefore have 

∂L(p)

∂x2Di

= 0 . (11) A pixel-coordinate loss has no gradient path to any Gaussian’s image-space position through standard rasterization. The differential position map yields a unit positional gradient. For a pixel p covered by Gaussian i,the differentiable position from Eq. (5) is 

˜pi = x2Di + ( Σ2Di )1/2z, z = sg 



(Σ2Di )−1/2(p − x2Di )



.

At evaluation, (Σ2Di )1/2z = p − x2Di , so ˜pi = p numerically (the rendered position map equals the pixel grid). Because z is treated as a constant under stop-gradient, however, 

∂ ˜pi

∂x2Di

= I. (12) A pixel-coordinate loss applied to ˜pi therefore produces a unit-magnitude positional gradient on the covering Gaussian’s 2D mean, which then propagates through the rasterizer and the differentiable MPM simulation back to the Gaussians’ 3D positions and physical state. 

# D Dataset Details 

Scene composition. Our synthetic dataset is built from 10 source meshes drawn from Google Scanned Objects (GSO) [ 3]: 5 objects simulated with an elastic (Neo-Hookean) constitutive model and 5 simulated with a plasticine constitutive model. For each scene, the material parameters (Young’s modulus E, Poisson’s ratio ν, and yield stress σy for plasticine) and the initial velocity are independently sampled at random. All scenes share a fixed density of 1000 kg/m 3, gravity of 9.81 m/s 2, and a frictionless ground plane at z = 0 . Each sequence is simulated with MPM at 20 fps. 

Scenes. Tab. 5 lists the 10 source GSO objects and the constitutive model used for each. Table 5: Source GSO objects and their assigned constitutive model. 

Object Constitutive model 

BIRD_RATTLE Neo-Hookean CHICKEN_NESTING Neo-Hookean PEEKABOO_ROLLER Neo-Hookean TWISTED_PUZZLE Neo-Hookean WHALE_WHISTLE_6PCS_SET Neo-Hookean BABY_CAR Plasticine COAST_GUARD_BOAT Plasticine LACING_SHEEP Plasticine MINI_EXCAVATOR Plasticine OWL_SORTER Plasticine 

Constitutive models. Both material models share the same Lamé parameter conversion from E and 

ν:

μ = E

2(1 + ν) , λ = E ν 

(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν) . (13) 15 Neo-Hookean (elastic). We use the compressible Neo-Hookean Kirchhoff stress: 

τ = μ FF ⊤ +  λ ln J − μI, J = det F, (14) where F is the deformation gradient. 

Plasticine. The plasticine model combines a Fixed Corotated elastic stress with a von Mises return mapping in principal log-strain space. With the polar decomposition F = RS , the elastic Kirchhoff stress is 

τ = 2 μ (F − R)F⊤ + λ J (J − 1) I. (15) Plasticity is enforced by a return mapping on the trial elastic deformation gradient. Given the SVD 

Ftrial = UΣV ⊤, we form the principal log strains ε = ln Σ and their deviatoric part ˆε = ε− 13 tr( ε) I.The von Mises yield indicator is 

y = ∥ˆε∥ − σy

2μ . (16) If y > 0, we project ε ← ε − y ˆε/∥ˆε∥ and update F ← U exp( ε)V⊤; otherwise F is left unchanged. 

# E Details on Losses 

Optical Flow Loss Lf low The probability-based optical flow loss in the main paper uses a per-pixel uncertainty σ produced by the flow estimator [28]. The full loss with explicit uncertainty is: 

Lflow = − 1

|Ωt|

X

> j∈Ωt

h

log p



f0→t(pj ) | ˆf0→t(pj ), σ 0→t(pj )



+ log p



ft-1→t(pj ) | ˆft-1→t(pj ), σ t-1→t(pj )

 i 

,

(17) where σi→j (·) is the per-pixel uncertainty from frame i to frame j at pixel p. The likelihood downweights high-uncertainty pixels, which improves robustness when physical dynamics change visibility between frames. 16